MOUNTY
YARNS
Lived Experiences of
Aboriginal young people
in Mt Druitt

Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge and pay our respects to the
Traditional Owners and Custodians of Mount Druitt,
the Darug people. We acknowledge their continuing
connection to this land, their ancestors, and their
culture. We also acknowledge and respect the
ongoing contribution of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples to our community.
As young Aboriginal people, we recognise the
importance of our connection to Country, and we
acknowledge the significance of Mount Druitt as
a meeting place for many cultures. We stand in
solidarity with all First Nations peoples and commit
to learning, sharing and respecting their knowledge
and traditions.
We also acknowledge the impacts of colonisation
and ongoing systemic injustices faced by First
Nations peoples, and we commit to playing our
part in dismantling these systems of oppression.
We honour the resilience, strength, and wisdom of
our ancestors and strive to carry on their legacy for
future generations.
We pay our respects to the Elders past, present, and
emerging, and we thank them for their guidance and
leadership in our healing journey.

2 MOUNTY YARNS

Artwork Story:
My name is Terleaha Williams. I am a proud Kamilaroi and Yuin woman raised in Mount Druitt. I created this piece for the Mounty
Yarns program. A program that I am truly passionate about.
The painting represents us as the Aboriginal young people of Mount Druitt, walking beside our community, as we navigate
systems that have remained harmful to our people and community for many generations.
We are meeting to listen and yarn. We are acknowledging traditional practices passed down to us whilst drawing on our own
lived experiences to shape and deliver new frameworks led by us, for us.
Graphics: The graphics in this resource are illustrated by Oumoula Mckenzie.
Design work: The design of this resource was done by Amy Allerton from Indigico Creative.
MOUNTY YARNS 3

CONTENTS
Acknowledgement of Country..........................................2
Design Acknowledgements..............................................3
Contents...........................................................................4
Foreword..........................................................................4
Call to Action....................................................................7
What needs to change......................................................8
The Mounty Yarns Approach.............................................9
Structure of Mounty Yarns................................................10
Endorsement of Mounty Yarns........................................10
Our Yarns........................................................................11
Just the usual...................................................................12
I can’t even walk down the street....................................13
Another overnighter.........................................................16
Here we go again, same shit every day..........................17
Where’s our support?.......................................................20
Taught us how to read and white.....................................22
Retelling your trauma, for what?......................................24
Just another way to harass us.........................................27
Koori court is probably the best thing I know..................29
Can’t hold us down..........................................................30
Our Solutions..................................................................33
Pathways for Change - Mount Druitt is
getting ready for a beautiful new beginning
How to back us...............................................................35
1. Support young people in community..........................36
2. Justice..........................................................................41
3. Education and learning...............................................48
What you can do right now............................................50
Thanks to........................................................................51
4 MOUNTY YARNS

FOREWORD
Mounty Yarns are our stories. We are
Aboriginal young people from Mount
Druitt (Mounty), with lived experience
of the criminal justice system. We
have gathered stories, expertise and
knowledge from Aboriginal young
people about the impact the criminal
justice system has on our community,
and what we want to see change.
These stories show the challenges
of growing up in Mount Druitt,
challenges which contribute to the
overrepresentation of Aboriginal young
people in the criminal justice system,
and show the lack of youth voice in
decision-making about the things that
affect us.

Aboriginal young people in Mount Druitt
Mount Druitt is our home. We are all from different areas, tribes and families. Mount Druitt is a caring, loving, supportive
community that comes together in times of need. There are heaps of blackfellas, everyone knows everyone. We have some hectic
memories around here that you couldn’t lose in your brain even if you wanted to. If you could get a projector in some of our ears
and you could see, we’d be here all day laughing in stitches.
The young people of Mounty are loyal, passionate, talented, caring and love to have a laugh. We all grew up going through the
same toxic situations as kids, that is this glue stuck to all of us and kept us together no matter what. We can’t stress how much this
is a family, and how much we love our brothers and sisters. There were some shitty situations that always come up that we couldn’t
have helped if we tried to, it’s just unfair situations that we just took with both hands and ran with it, and we’re just overcoming it.
We love and value our culture and our Elders. We recognise that without the resistance and leadership from our old ones that we
would not be in a position to speak up and make change. We are willing and proud to take up their fight. Despite our people’s
longstanding fight for self-determination and land rights, we are still at the mercy of a system that is afraid of us. A system that has
traumatised our grandparents, parents, and now us. A system so afraid that it keeps 10-year-old children locked behind barbed
wire, controls their contact with family, and repeatedly strip-searches them. The truth is that it is Aboriginal children and young
people who should be afraid.
We grow up expecting bad things to happen to us.
We worry that things won’t change, so we are going to change them.
People from Mount Druitt are always labelled. We are all so proud to
be from this community. We want to create our solutions, and though
we know it’s not going to be easy, we are committed to building a
better future for our families and communities.
We want to tell young people that you need to talk up and tell
people where you want to see change in your community. That’s
what we’ve been doing, because we’re sick of seeing all our brothers,
cousins, aunties and uncles coming in and out of jail all the time. If
you want change around here, just never be scared to speak up.

We don’t want the next
generation to go through what
we went through. We want to be
a voice so others don’t have to
keep repeating their stories. We
need to make sure young fullas’
voices are being heard now.”
- Terleaha Williams and Isaiah Sines, Youth Project
Leads Mounty Yarns
MOUNTY YARNS 5

6 MOUNTY YARNS

CALL TO ACTION
As a community and as young people, we know what works for us. Solutions need a strong focus
on self-determination, investing in young people, and changing the way other people look at young
people in Mount Druitt.
Solutions need to be centred around youth and community leadership, with the goal of
intergenerational change.
As Aboriginal young people we can tell you that the “Justice System” is not working, and is actually having a
devastating effect. Our young people need to know that we as a community care for them. The way systems
are set up at the moment, it is hard to tell. Nothing improves by locking up kids. When you do, you take us
away from everything we value – our family, our culture, our country.
Governments need to stop investing so much in police and prisons and start investing in young people, with
proper support to keep them away from the criminal justice system in the first place. We are strong advocates
for raising the age of criminal responsibility. As you read through the experiences of young people in Mount
Druitt and see how young we were when we were harassed, traumatised and brutalised by police, and
harmed by systems that didn’t support us, remember that no young person should be experiencing these
things.
We want everyone to be able to learn from the experiences, strengths, challenges and resilience of us as
young people. We speak for those young people who aren’t usually given a voice or listened to, young
people who are actively disbelieved.
We share these yarns with you and ask that you listen and hear our truths.
We hope that you hear our solutions and back us to make change.
MOUNTY YARNS 7

WHAT NEEDS
TO CHANGE
At their core, all of the ideas
that young Aboriginal people
came up with require these
pathways for change.

8 MOUNTY YARNS

THE MOUNTY YARNS APPROACH
We are just some of the strong Aboriginal young people
in Mount Druitt fighting for a better future for our young
people. We want to build a better future for our families
and communities. We want to build the solutions.
We, as Aboriginal young people with our own experiences
of the impact of the criminal justice system, have gathered
these stories and bring our own experiences of growing up
in Mount Druitt into this work. We have had one-on-one
yarns and yarning circles, run sessions in schools and youth
justice centres. We have talked to our friends, families and
communities.
We are talking to and hearing from the young people who
many say, “you can’t engage with”. Many of those young
people are now involved in leading this work. We’ve talked
to almost 100 young people. Their ages range from 6 years
old to 26 years old, with the majority of in-depth contributors
being between the ages of 15-23. 12 young people have
taken up lead roles in this work. With the right support and
trust in place, young people do want to be involved, share
their knowledge and that they care deeply.
The young people we talked to, and who have led this work,
have experiences of being in foster care, being suspended
and excluded from multiple schools, and of being in and out
of custody during this project. We have repeatedly been let
down by services and broken government systems.

Every young person had a traumatising story with the
police. Too often those stories get laughed off and
normalised.
Young people told us that they wanted a short film to come
out of this work, so the Mounty Yarns film was created. The
report and film are for young people to use as advocacy tools.
We didn’t wait for these advocacy tools to be finished,
because we knew this work couldn’t wait. We have already
started leading change. We have partnered with organisations.
Our OzTag program has been a key part of the youth
engagement for Mounty Yarns. Young people also asked for
a music program which is up and running; the stories told
through our music is an important part of how we can listen to
young people’s experiences.
We have also been advocating for our community. We have
sat down with the Executive Director of Youth Justice and
the Advocate for Children and Young People. We have
presented at conferences and published articles. We have
met with academics, with community members, with service
providers, and with the National Children’s Commissioner of
the Australian Human Rights Commission. We’ve advocated
for our peers at court and in meetings with police. We’ve met
with corporates and philanthropists to ask for flexible and
responsive funding for things that young people want.

MOUNTY YARNS 9

Young people trust us because we have been through what
they have and they can see us making change.

Endorsement of
Mounty Yarns

We couldn’t include every yarn, every idea, but this is just the
beginning. We are going to keep yarning, advocating and
making change.

We’ve spoken to our Elders and community
leaders who want young people like us to lead
and will back us to make change. They include:

We are showing that what works is young people leading
their own solutions.

Structure of Mounty Yarns
We were inspired by the Koorie Youth Council’s Ngaga-dji
report and want to extend our thanks for their support and
shared learnings.
Each of the short stories in the Mounty Yarns report is made
up of stories that we heard again and again, and that we had
experienced too. These stories have been de-identified and
young people have had final say over what goes in the report.
The second section of the report “Our Solutions” contains our
ideas and pathways for change.
WARNING: the following pages contain distressing content
and coarse language.

10 MOUNTY YARNS

•
•
•
•
•
•

Aunty Zona Wilkinson
Aunty Jenny Ebsworth
Aunty Sandra Hickey
Aunty Elaine Gordon
Uncle Tony Hunter
Aunty Lizzie May

OUR YARNS

MOUNTY YARNS 11

Just the usual
It was a sunny afternoon at Whalan Reserve and we were passing the ball around getting ready
for the game. We were laughing and mucking around, everyone was geed because we were in
the semis for OzTag. We finished and started walking to the shops to grab a feed. As we were
walking down the street we saw the coppers and we just all started running.
Because we know, for us, there are no good interactions with police.

...FOR US, THERE ARE NO
GOOD INTERACTIONS WITH
POLICE.”

12 MOUNTY YARNS

I can’t even walk down the street
I started running home, my heart pounding in my chest as my feet hit the pavement. It was fight or flight. We hate them. And they
hate us. It’s always been like that. The tension between the police and our community never stops. It only gets worse.
The first time I was assaulted by police, I was only eight or nine years old. I was with a couple of mates and we used to just walk
around, hang around shops - Whalan shops - and every time we would see a copper we would just run, or they’d just pull us over
and harass us, like they always do. One time, there were two coppers, they chased us, and my older brothers got away, but I was
young back then, and one copper, he caught me. He pushed me to the ground and hit me on the back of the head with a bat. I
had a split in the back of my head. I still have the scar.
We all have a story, and the anger and trauma lasts for so long. A copper walks up to me and I just feel anger all over my body.
Anytime we are anywhere we have our escape routes planned in case we need to run. We can’t even walk down the street without
being harassed. We are scared. Just because we know what the outcome is going to be like.
So I run.

ANYTIME WE ARE
ANYWHERE WE HAVE OUR
ESCAPE ROUTES PLANNED
IN CASE WE NEED TO RUN.”

I grew up here so I hit the back lanes. I could hear them put on
the sirens and knew they were chasing us. When I looked over my
shoulder, I could see my cousin was running the same way as me.
The other boys must have cut in different directions. That’s good
because it gives us a better chance.
Then, out of nowhere, a car came out of the street and they
tried to run us over when we ran down that way. The car was just
straight behind us, speeding up on us. Boom.

MOUNTY YARNS 13

They got my cousin, so I went back and was tackled by some big
bloke. He hit me a few times while I was down. I yelled at him
that we haven’t done anything wrong, and he said, “Why did you
run from us then? You were lucky we didn’t shoot you.”
They put me at the back of the car because there are cameras
at the front. As soon as I gave them my name, they started
asking me about my family and who I am related to. Coppers
just assume, like once they hear our last name, they just assume
that we are getting into trouble or we’re up to no good. They
never ask about how good anyone is doing, it’s always just an
interrogation. There’s a target on your back because of your
family name.
It’s hard to believe that these cops are only trained for 8 months
at the Academy, and they end up with all this power. Power to
traumatise, affect our lives forever. Power to be believed over us.
I was let go as I had done nothing wrong but run. I get stopped
whether I run or not. Whenever police see me, they just see a
suspect. It leaves you with a sense of distrust, and you start to
feel down about yourself as to why you are treated poorly by
them when you’ve done nothing wrong to begin with.
As I walked home my whole body was shaking but I kept my eyes
darting because I know if another cop car sees me I’ll be running
again.

14 MOUNTY YARNS

WHENEVER POLICE SEE
ME, THEY JUST SEE A
SUSPECT.”

MOUNTY YARNS 15

Another overnighter
I didn’t even reach around the corner before they had me
laying on the ground in cuffs, thrown in the back of a paddy
wagon. I knew I’d get bail refused, I have been every time
since I turned 10. I’m 13 now. Every time I don’t get bail from
the cops, the Magistrate at court the next day says I should of
got bail.
I heard my friends yelling “which station are you taking him
to?” We always try to make sure that someone knows where
we are to help keep us safe. In the past the police haven’t
even let me tell my Aunty when I was getting arrested - she
was in a house 15 metres away.

I spoke to the Aboriginal Legal Service on the phone and
they told me to say nothing. Last time I got bail because my
youth worker heard from one of my friends I was in the cells.
She showed up and knew the system better than the gunjies*.
They put really strict bail conditions that I couldn’t follow but
my youth worker helped get it listed at court and got them
changed nearly straight away.
I’ve had a lot of shit bail conditions, like once I had to report
to Mount Druitt police but was living in Parramatta and I got
fines just going to report. Even this time, that non-association
was with a cousin I was living with, where I was bailed to
at the time, so I had to be there. I even had one that said I
wasn’t allowed in Mount Druitt, when I was 11 years old. But
everyone I knew lived in Mount Druitt. No one was offering me
help to live somewhere else.

The police said there was reports of break and enters in the
area. Always the same excuse. When they looked up our
names, they see that me and my cousin have a non-association
order.

I gave them a few addresses and people’s places that I could
of stayed at but they didn’t think it was suitable, so I ended up
staying the night in a cell.

They put me in the fishtank at the station. The cells are so
small and everyone just stares at you.

*police

The police say things to me, to get me to bite back at them.
Real racist things.
They tried to ring my carer but they didn’t answer. No one
came for me. The person in the cell next to me was on ice.
The police tried to get me to sign something to get bail and
made me say I’d go to PCYC. I don’t trust the PCYC. It’s run by
cops. They are always asking me questions about my brothers
if I go there.
16 MOUNTY YARNS

THE POLICE SAY THINGS TO ME,
TO GET ME TO BITE BACK AT
THEM. REAL RACIST THINGS.”

Here we go again, same shit every day
Finally on the truck. Today is the day. I have been waiting for six months on remand. I am going for bail today and my lawyer
reckons I got a good chance. I am excited it will be Youth Koori Court too.
I remember the first time I went to Cobham, I was so scared. A thousand things were going through my mind. Getting strip
searched, it feels like all your dignity gets left there. I never felt more scared and powerless. You never really get over that
feeling or get used to it. But it happens a lot. I felt sick getting strip searched from the cops and then at Cobham again.
They don’t tell you nothing. They all think you’ve been there, done it before. I didn’t even know how to use the radio or TV. I had
to bang on the door and ask the lady how to do it.
That feels like so long ago, been doing the same routine every day since. I wake up same time, same breakfast, same chores,
muster, and go to bed at the same time every day. It even feels like they drag out the whole meal routine, eat, sweep, mop, wipe
the benches, so you barely have any time outside of your cell. Even if you’ve finished your meal in five minutes, you still have to
wait for the whole routine. They don’t give you a proper chance, they want you to get institutionalised right away.
Being locked up, being away from family, having anxiety, and being locked up in small spaces and stuff, it messes with you
mentally. Messes with your head, being in environments like that. You overthink stuff. Think of bad stuff. When I’m always by
myself, a lot of stuff gets to me.
It helped to speak to an Elder and some Aboriginal workers. I felt comfortable talking to Elders, you know, one of our Elders that’s
like you. Haven’t been able to yarn to an Elder for a few weeks though. There’s so many of us Aboriginal kids in here, it’s hard to
get to all of us.
I swear they write you up for shitty little things. Writeups get held against you. I hope they don’t bring them up in court today. My
last one was for singing in the shower. I feel they purposely do it and it’s so dependent on their mood coming into work. If they
are in a bad mood, they don’t care about you. They’ll write you up, put you in your room, they don’t care. Just when I start going
good, boom another writeup. This place isn’t about helping, it’s all about earning your points. That’s what they try to do, bribe you
to get points, like if you don’t go to school, you don’t earn your points. You miss two points, you lose your TV.

MOUNTY YARNS 17

And you can’t complain about the writeups either. You get targeted if you complain. You can’t get through to
the Ombo*. I tried 23 times in one day before I got through or it just goes to the Centre Manager and you
get targeted. So who do we complain to about the Ombo? The boys complain to the Official Visitors about
the food quality but it doesn’t change, even though she’s good. Complaints take so long. We wanted to get
cutlery. Even that didn’t work. Complaints go nowhere.
I used to have dreams that I would break out of my room, and like, run down to admissions and get all my stuff
and walk out of the Centre. It’s just being in that environment and having it in your thoughts, you go to sleep
thinking of it and you just dream about it. Everyone does.
I grew up without an identity. I didn’t know who my family was. And being in juvie tipped me over. Seeing my
brothers leaving and coming back again. We are all so stuck in the system. Being an inmate was becoming my
identity. They make it so hard for family to visit, it’s almost like they want to keep you apart from them. Even to
get them on your dial list takes so long. It can take up to three months to get calls or visits. It depends on your
behaviour sometimes.
The last time I got out, I felt like the workers didn’t want me to succeed, no one helped me find
accommodation. I got out too late to go to a refuge, so a worker ended up paying for two nights in a hotel to
give me some space to find somewhere. I left custody without any photo ID, no licence, no working bank card.
I think a lot of people still don’t want me to succeed, but I learned about my culture this time and have started
piecing together my identity. The Aboriginal staff and Elders helped me a lot.

But you shouldn’t have to go into custody to learn this stuff. It doesn’t feel like the right
place to do it, but it’s the only way to connect to culture and do stuff. It’s the only chance
you get.
I hope this time is different for me. As I get off the truck at court I see my brothers from Mounty getting off
too. They must of come in overnight. We give each other a nod and ask to be put in the cell underneath the
court together.
*Ombudsman

18 MOUNTY YARNS

MOUNTY YARNS 19

Where’s our support?
Wasn’t downstairs long before I went up to court. I’ve spent
so many hours waiting at this court. At least I got to see one
of the brothers downstairs that’s been away for a while. I got
bail but got let out and there was no one there to support me.
There is never any support. The court kept trying to get me to
go to PCYC programs. Everyone knows you can’t trust the
police. The PCYC “engaged” with us but then they’d come
back and flog us, and use everything they learnt about us
against us. They know all our nicknames, I seen it in my briefs
from the police.
I wanted to stay out of trouble but it’s so boring. We done
dumb shit ‘cos there’s nothing to do around here. There’s no
places to go and just hang out, especially after hours. That’s
when we really need stuff and support, outside of 9-5pm. Case
workers think they aren’t responsible or don’t care about us
after 5pm, they clock off.
It don’t feel like my voice is heard. There’s no support for
me. I pretty much have to beg for something. For me I don’t
like asking for help. We need more people who give a fuck
and actually ask what we want and what’s really going on and
won’t arrest or remove us.
I had one program that helped me, but it only lasted 12
weeks, they renewed me for another 12 but then that was it.
At least I’m still young. I look at my older brother and once
you hit 18, it looks like you just get dumped on the ground
again, and there’s no one to reach out for because there
literally isn’t many supports for people 18 and over, no one
making sure they’re not slipping back under.
20 MOUNTY YARNS

We’re both homeless and I was hoping that he could get
a place for us both. But there’s a waiting list for the service
that helps with that and then you get told the waiting list for
housing in Mount Druitt is around 10-15 years wait. We’ve
been homeless since we were removed and have stayed in
so many abandoned houses and it still takes so long to get a
place. No surprise that some of my older family end up in jail
just to have a place to stay.
I’ve had like 15 FACS* caseworkers in two years. There’s no
support there. You learn their name and when you go to ring
them up they aren’t your caseworker anymore.
The brothers are my only support.
I never knew I was entitled to anything because I grew up in
and out of FACS. Most of my friends who grew up like me
have no idea. A worker got me a “Leaving Care Plan”, and she
had to follow up with my FACS worker every week until I got it.
Even then, I didn’t know how to access the money, and no one
was helping me.
That worker just left and now I don’t know who to ring. Maybe
I’ll ask the lawyer the next time they lock me up.
*Family and Community Services - formerly known as DOCS, now
comes under Department of Communities and Justice

WE NEED MORE PEOPLE WHO GIVE A FUCK...”

MOUNTY YARNS 21

Taught us how to read
and white
As I left court I was mad. They gave me a bail condition to
go to school. I haven’t been at school in more than a year. I
was kicked out of mostly every school and now when I get
suspended I’m happy because I don’t have to go to school.
The teachers I’ve had are racist and called me “stupid”,
“ADHD”, “ODD”, “shit”. They said I was a “bad kid”. It made
me feel dumb as hell.
Teachers also targeted me and my friends and jumped to
conclusions about us because of our last names.
Teachers used to try and like raise their voice at me because
I didn’t know as much. And I used to get all defensive
and angry, so then I would just swear at them and lose my
temper, and that’s most of the reasons why I got suspended.
Sometimes school let me come back for one hour a day, but I
didn’t really see the point in going for just one hour.
I wish instead of just suspending me all the time, they
could have helped me, because the more they suspended
me the more I didn’t care.
The teachers didn’t really know what to do with us, because
a lot of the time we didn’t even want to be there. But they
didn’t really try to find out why we didn’t want to be there.
Instead of sitting down and actually talking to us and trying to
understand where we were coming from, they would try to get
22 MOUNTY YARNS

us out of the school and out of the way. We know things about
surviving systems that they’ll never know. We knew then that
if teachers didn’t care enough to try with us, then no one else
would.
It feels like no one ever listens to us at school. There needs to
be other options, not just forcing us to stay at school when it’s
not working and teachers pick on you.
One of my cousins used to teach at the school. He was always
doing these programs, like Aboriginal programs, like dancing,
Koori dance and stuff. That was probably the only thing that I
was interested in at school, and having Elders and like having
cultural programs and stuff, during school hours. Learning
about culture is what I was into. That’s what made me want
to go to school, doing those kinds of programs. They mainly
happened in primary school though.
I didn’t tell my lawyer that schools won’t take me because then
I might not get bail and have to stay in custody.

WE KNEW THEN THAT IF
TEACHERS DIDN’T CARE
ENOUGH TO TRY WITH US,
THEN NO ONE ELSE WOULD.”

MOUNTY YARNS 23

Retelling your trauma, for what?
I’m late for my appointment. It took so long for my adrenaline to come down last night after we copped that chase but I smoked
‘em. I’m stressing, because I have to go all the way into Parramatta to meet this counsellor that the court said I had to do. Lucky
my friend is coming with me.
I’ve been ordered to go there before. Got sat in this tiny room inside and the psych kept asking me to repeat my story over and
over again. Each time the court ordered me to go to a psych, I had to tell my story again, and again, and again. Nothing has
helped. I started using to numb the talk in my head. Then it wasn’t long until I was in Cobham.
In community there’s heaps of shame around it. I guess that’s why most of us end up in jail. That’s the sad truth. Like, a lot of the
boys don’t have anyone to talk to. So, they just do dumb things and end up in jail. Yeah that’s their version of Headspace, what I
know about mental health is jail. We don’t get any help until we are in jail, then, it’s too late.
At Cobham I went to the psychologist. I didn’t want to be there, but I had to otherwise I would lose points. I couldn’t really
understand her properly. And she was just making me angry. She kept telling me there were things wrong with me and how I
should change, nothing about how the system is fucked.
We are all carrying so much of our own stuff, such
heavy burdens, but also all of the stuff that our
families went through and the impacts of racism that
we experience from police, teachers, shop owners,
security, community members, every day. It’s huge. It
weighs on us.
She was just pissing me right off so I just got up and
left. I felt judged, confused and rushed to talk, I’ve
already told my story to so many people, over and
over. Why would I trust this lady who has no idea
where I come from?

24 MOUNTY YARNS

WE DON’T GET ANY HELP
UNTIL WE ARE IN JAIL,
THEN, IT’S TOO LATE.”

I watched other kids go into custody normal-as, but they can’t handle being locked up and they get on the drugs like sleepers
and that and they full fry themselves hard, like they full change themselves forever. They do it to themselves or the screws do
it to them, to help control them they put them on the drugs. I didn’t want that to be me, so whenever they gave me tablets to
take I would trade them for chocolates and chips. I suppose on the inside and on the out, we just get fed drugs to deal with our
trauma, the main difference is who the dealer is.
It feels to us like the drug problem here in Mount Druitt is getting worse. The kids who are taking drugs are just getting younger
and younger, which just makes it more and more dangerous, more and more fucked. They’re young and do things without
thinking, or do things to impress the boys. Lots of the young people here act like it’s nothing, like they don’t have a problem.
They don’t see how it’s affecting them and their community.
We have nowhere to go, even if we do want to get clean or want help to stop drinking. If you go into custody you just get on
different drugs. There is only one Aboriginal alcohol and drug service near Mount Druitt and that’s for adults. They have helped
out my aunties and uncles. But they have different problems to us and if you’re a young person, you don’t want to sit around
with fully grown men and women talking about your problems.
Sometimes the best thing has been just being surrounded by the brothers, having a safe space to yarn. For me, it was more
the boys who were the people that actually listened to me, that I could tell things like maybe my mindset, my mental
state and stuff, I could talk to the boys about it, tell ‘em how I’m feeling. But with other people it felt like they didn’t
care or they just couldn’t be bothered listening. But with the boys, I feel like I could share anything with them. I can’t
wait for the next game of OzTag so I can spin a yarn.
I can’t tell the court or anyone here that though. They would just laugh at me and think they know better for me. I just hope they
don’t lock me up.

MOUNTY YARNS 25

26 MOUNTY YARNS

Just another way to
harass us
We are walking through Dawson Mall towards Mount Druitt
Station and already feeling anxious because there’s never a
day that the cops aren’t there. If my mate didn’t have to get to
Parra for some appointment and we weren’t running late we
would of walked to Rooty Hill to avoid ‘em. Do they seriously
not have anything better to do? I don’t have the money for a
ticket but need to get to court. I’ll need to wait till they leave,
I’m already so stressed out about court. I see another young
person try jump the barrier but there are cops on either side
and they get caught. I slip through the barrier while they are
distracted.
I’m stressing on the train because I know I can still get fined
and because everyone is beefing and I don’t want to get
jumped. I hate this feeling, I get it every time I get on the train
to report to my Youth Justice in Penrith too. Every time I
get pulled up by police, even if it’s just an Opal ticket, my
whole body just starts shaking, like full just shaking. I feel
like I’m getting real bad anxiety just ‘cos you don’t know
what they’re gonna do.
When I get off at the station for court the transit police are
waiting. They give me another fine, to add to my fines for not
wearing a helmet, riding a pushbike, walking across the road
with it, crossing when the light is red, you know, stupid things
like that. It’s a power trip for them.
I don’t know what their go is. Maybe because they can’t get us

on any other thing so they hit us for fines? That’s the only way
they’re going to get us. Or they want to ask about my family,
when my brother’s on the run. When they pull me over, there’s
always a question about where my brother is. It’s never, oh,
why are you on the road, walking across. The first question will
be, have you seen this fella, or have you been hanging around
this group again?
I can’t afford the $200 fine. I have friends that have more than
$10,000 worth of fines. I only have $4000. It’s all fake money, it
only really affects you when you’re trying to get your life back
on track, when you want to get your licence and that.
I only know I got that much in fines from when I went to
the Youth Koori Court. One of the lawyers asked me some
questions and I signed some stuff. Then they told me the
amount. I don’t think I will ever be able to pay it off because
I keep getting new ones as I work off my old ones. When we
play OzTag one of the workers has it set up so that it works off
our fines. If it wasn’t for that I don’t think I would ever get a
licence.

..THEY GIVE ME ANOTHER
FINE, TO ADD TO MY FINES
...IT’S A POWER TRIP FOR
THEM.”
MOUNTY YARNS 27

28 MOUNTY YARNS

Koori Court is probably
the best thing I know
I am graduating Youth Koori Court today. I’ve been doing
really good. I’m even managing the boys OzTag team. One of
the older fullas from the area started an OzTag team for us and
a bunch of us in the Youth Koori Court play or work to support
it. I was worried last night when the police followed the OzTag
bus to the boys’ houses but everyone was allowed to be out
for OzTag even if they had curfew or house arrest. Our worker
told them so, but the boys were still freaking out.
I was so happy when I got accepted into the Youth Koori
Court. In Youth Koori Court they actually see the effort
you’re making, even the small things that feel big to you.
In normal court, they don’t care how long it’s been between
your offending.
When I first started getting locked up at the police station at
11, they told my mum that I had to have an offence and plead
guilty before she could get help with me. I could hear her on
the phone at night calling FACS for help even. Youth Koori
Court was how I got linked into a worker who I trusted. I spent
a lot of time in custody before then though and got told to go
to some shit service.

At Youth Koori Court they actually give you a chance and listen
to you. They listen to what you have to say and how you feel.
They actually sit down and talk about what’s going on for you,
so they can try and understand why you’ve ended up here. It’s
not just people deciding what’s best for you without even
knowing anything about you. It feels like they actually care
and that they want to help you, not just lock you up. It
definitely helps, stuff actually gets done. In other courts they
just look at the charge and then look at you like that’s you.
They only see one side.
The Magistrate, she’s nice, and she wants to know about our
Aboriginal culture. She just wants to help us. Having an Elder
in there with you too, it makes a big difference. It makes you
feel more comfortable and it’s good for young Koori brothers
and sisters to see an Elder in the courtroom. There should be
more opportunities for young fellas to go through Koori court.
They were all so excited when I told them about the OzTag
Final and one of the lawyers got me a cake. The Magistrate
said she would come down and watch the Final even. One of
my older cousins is hopefully getting out today too and he is a
weapon and is going to play with us.
I walked out that court door hopefully for the last time. I just
got to wait to sign the papers then finally I am free.

As we walked in I saw my cousin waiting for normal court. I
feel bad for her because she isn’t on Youth Koori Court. I told
her about it and that she should go for it if she doesn’t beat
her charge.

MOUNTY YARNS 29

Can’t hold us down
It always feels weird being back here at court. This place
separated me from my family twice, first through the care
system and then the justice system. But I am here today to
support one of the younger brothers who is getting out after
going on a “little holiday”.
I come from a big family, and at seven years old I was taken
from my family. They took me from school, and more than a
decade later, I still can’t handle going near that school. We all
got taken to the principal’s office then they locked the door
and we never went home. The first time I went back to that
suburb I was on a motorbike and I blacked out. It just brought
all the trauma rushing back.
My dad was also taken from his family, and growing up, we
didn’t know much about who we were. Like I knew I was black
and from up the coast but that was about all.
I grew up in foster care, moving from one placement
to another, spending time in kinship placements, foster
care, and emergency accommodation. I never had stable
accommodation until I came into custody, where I finally had
a bed to sleep in and a three-course meal. I travelled all over
NSW with different people, and even when I had a good
family, they weren’t mine, and they didn’t understand. I spent
most of my time with the boys because they were my family.
The brothers who had families, shared them. They never
pushed anyone away, they were always welcoming and
especially a couple of us boys who were with DOCS and on
the streets, they gave us a place to stay, fed us and not just
30 MOUNTY YARNS

out of pity for us, but just ‘cos we were family and they didn’t
want to see any of the boys on the street or vice versa you
know.
Us boys, we never had anyone telling us not to do something
or to stay home, that there were other ways to have fun.
We started using, got in trouble, and ended up in custody.
Imagine reconnecting with your blood brothers after being in
care for so long, and it’s in jail. All of my seven brothers were
once handcuffed at a funeral out on day leave. It used to be
like a Mount Druitt reunion in there, with almost every unit full
of us boys from Mount Druitt.
But the only reason why I know what I know is that I love the
feeling, the brotherhood of our group of boys, and the sense
of family. That connection helped me through some tough
times. As soon as I saw my boys, all my worries and problems
went away.
I had an Aboriginal mentor who started visiting me before
I left custody and would take me for day trips. More young
people need people like him, people who aren’t “give up”
people.

IMAGINE RECONNECTING WITH
YOUR BLOOD BROTHERS AFTER
BEING IN CARE FOR SO LONG,
AND IT’S IN JAIL.”

So when I got out I wanted to do the same for my brothers
and sisters that those mentors and workers did for me. We
started to talk and plan for things we could do together to
change our lives and our community. We started Mounty
Yarns, a safe place, because we’re all family, and we all go
through the same stuff and can relate to it. It’s a place where
you can come and be yourself, explain what your life is like
without being laughed at because we all feel the same way.
It feels good to be around positive people, and we all do
something that’s good and it gets our minds off things. We
can all be ourselves around each other and express our
feelings. Because we are a family.
One of the first things we did was create an Oz tag team. As
kids, we would have big games, and the police would often
show up and give us Move Along Orders. The boys loved
playing, so I came up with the idea to bring them together
for games and partner with services so that the police
couldn’t pick on us.
We do the things young people ask us to do and now do
cultural days on Country, music workshops and a whole
bunch of things that young people tell us they want to do.
I am here at the court to tell them that and so it can all be
added to my younger brother’s support plan.

WE STARTED MOUNTY
YARNS, A SAFE PLACE,
BECAUSE WE’RE ALL FAMILY...
IT’S A PLACE WHERE
YOU CAN COME AND BE
YOURSELF, EXPLAIN WHAT
YOUR LIFE IS LIKE WITHOUT
BEING LAUGHED AT BECAUSE
WE ALL FEEL THE SAME
WAY.”

Now that I have a child, I want their life to be nothing like
what I went through, and I am working hard to make that
a reality. They will know their connection to Country and
Culture, grow up with their family, and always have a home
to go to with services that are ready to support them if they
need it.

MOUNTY YARNS 31

32 MOUNTY YARNS

OUR SOLUTIONS

Pathways for Change - Mount Druitt is
getting ready for a beautiful new beginning

Note: When we say “young people” we are referring to Aboriginal young people from Mount Druitt who have been involved in Mounty Yarns.

“Mount Druitt’s home. Like you could ask anyone around
here. Most of the stories you hear about Mount Druitt are
bad, but to us it’s good like, nothing bad out here… Like I
can’t put more than any words than to say it’s home.”
Aboriginal young people in Mount Druitt are strong, resilient,
talented, and support each other and their community.
Aboriginal young people want to change the way other
people view young people in Mount Druitt. They want to
stand up and challenge the racism they face every day. They
want people to understand what they experience in their
everyday lives, the intergenerational challenges they face
and the strengths they can draw on from each other and their
community.
The Yarns you just read reflect a number of the systemic
challenges Aboriginal young people in Mount Druitt are up
against. The following section shares their ideas for change
and their solutions for creating a safer, stronger community.
Greater investment in young people is needed; investment
that is flexible and responsive to young people’s needs. Giving
young people decision-making power over how this money
should be spent is critical. Without this shift in power nothing
is going to change.

Although Mount Druitt continues to rank amongst the highest
in the state for youth crime per capita, Aboriginal young
people in Mount Druitt know what they want to strengthen
their community. They want young people and their families
to be free from harmful systems. They want to be free from
over-policing and feeling like they have a target on their back
because of the colour of their skin or their family name. They
want to be free from the negative stereotypes and want to be
treated as young people, not criminals.
They want the out-of-home-care system to stop tearing their
families apart and taking them away from their family, culture
and community. They want more safe and supported housing
options, because how is a young person supposed to stay out
of trouble without a roof over their head? They want better
pre and post release support from custody, preferably from
a community-based organisation. They want an education
system that values them and their culture.
They want all the harmful systems that impact their lives to be
accountable to them and their community. They don’t want
to feel like the justice system is actively working against them.
They don’t want to have to wait until they are involved in the
justice system to be able to get support, have access to basic
services or even access to culture.

MOUNTY YARNS 33

Aboriginal young people in Mount Druitt want to feel valued
and supported by the systems and services in their community.
They want to feel connected and proud of their culture,
identity and community. They want more opportunities to
connect to culture and Country and more Aboriginal workers,
who understand where they are coming from. They want a
safe place for all Aboriginal young people and their families
to be able to access culturally safe support, not a PCYC run by
police. They want workers and services to be flexible in how
they work with young people, by working outside of 9am-5pm
and having workers who care and who aren’t restrained by
strict criteria for giving support.
They want their voices to be heard and their ideas for change
to be implemented, because who knows better about the
system than those who have lived it? Most of all, they want
a better future for themselves, their families, and their entire
community.
Aboriginal young people and their families want access to
culturally safe and trauma-informed services. Service providers
need to better understand the context of colonisation,
features of family/kin relationships, cultural load, cultural
understandings, the intergenerational impacts of colonisation
and social exclusion, as well as an Aboriginal definition of
mental health:

34 MOUNTY YARNS

“...not just the physical well-being of an individual but
[referring] to the social, emotional and cultural well-being
of the whole Community in which each individual is able to
achieve their full potential as a human being thereby bringing
about the total well-being of their Community.”
- National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health
Organisation.
Aboriginal young people deserve systems and services that
support them and are responsive to what they need. They
want to be able to trust and rely on other people and systems,
not only on each other.

HOW TO BACK US
The current punitive approach to criminal justice and youth offending is clearly not working. The way the criminal justice system
and the systems feeding it are currently set up, prioritises locking up a 10 year old rather than addressing the underlying drivers
of offending. To change this, a real investment in Aboriginal young people is needed and Aboriginal young people with lived
experience must be involved in decision making. People need to stop looking at Aboriginal young people as the problem, but
rather the solution.
In this section we highlight recommendations from Aboriginal young people with lived experience of the criminal justice system,
on what changes are needed to better support Aboriginal young people and the Mount Druitt community.
At the core of these recommendations are three fundamental shifts. Without these shifts in thinking and practices, young people
will continue to face systems that work against them:

1. Self
Determination
Young people need
and want to have
more of a role in
decision making

2. Stand
Against Racism
Change the way
people look at
young people in
Mount Druitt

3. Invest in
Young People
Provide flexible and
responsive funding
that meets young
people’s needs

It costs $1,956 per day, per person to keep a young person locked up. Imagine what this money could do if it was spent on
supporting young people and their families before they end up in prison.
MOUNTY YARNS 35

1. Support young people in
community
1.1 An Aboriginal Controlled Youth Service for Mount
Druitt - a place for all Aboriginal young people and
families
An Aboriginal Controlled Youth Service in Mount Druitt could
provide:
• Early support and engagement with young people before
issues escalate
• More support for young people over 18
• Advocacy opportunities and training
• Opportunities to challenge the negative perceptions of
young Aboriginal people in Mount Druitt
• More activities for young people after-hours that young
people want to do and are involved in leading
• Cultural activities and engagement
• Opportunities to meet young people where they feel safe
and supported (this may be at OzTag, a drop-in centre,
Music Program etc.)
• A community space where young people and families can
access outreach workers from Youth Justice, Health etc.
• Access to community-based throughcare (pre and post
release support)
• Access to culturally appropriate mental health, alcohol and
other drugs support
• A community-based driver licencing program
• Help to link young people back into education
• A place Elders can come and yarn with young people
• An Aboriginal-run bail house in Mount Druitt
• Support in police custody outside of 9am-5pm
• Access to mentors and role models
• More Koori workers
36 MOUNTY YARNS

[WHAT WOULD HAVE MADE A DIFFERENCE]: COMMUNITY
RUN PROGRAMS LIKE PCYC BUT NOT RUN BY COPPERS. LIKE
MORE COMMUNITY STUFF BUT NOT RAN BY POLICE.”

TAKE THE FUNDING FROM PCYC AND PUT IT INTO A
COMMUNITY HUB, DROP IN CENTRES, MEN’S SHEDS.”

HAVE A DROP IN PLACE THAT IS A SAFE HAVEN - NO
WARRANTS, NO BAIL CHECKS - LED BY KIDS, A REFUGE, A
CENTRAL PLACE WHERE THEY CAN COME AND FEEL SAFE.”

KIDS NEED A SAFE SPACE, JUST THEM, TO KICK BACK WITH
THEIR MATES - AND SOME FAMILIES NEED THEIR OWN
SUPPORT.”

ABORIGINAL-CONTROLLED YOUTH SERVICE IN MOUNT
DRUITT WHERE YOUNG PEOPLE ARE SAFE, CAN DROP IN TO
LEARN LIFE SKILLS AND RECEIVE COUNSELLING OR TO JUST
RELAX AND LEARN FIRST AID, MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORT,
BRICK LAYING, OR TO JUST RELAX AND ENGAGE WITH
CULTURE.”

1.2 One service isn’t the whole solution, systems
need to change the way they work and what they
fund
What Aboriginal young people want from services and
workers:
• Access to support that is flexible and open after hours
• Access to mentors and role models
• More Koori workers
• Increased cultural sensitivity training for workers
• More workers that know the system and can navigate
it with young people

YOUNG PEOPLE IN MOUNT DRUITT WANT SERVICES THAT
OPERATE OUTSIDE OF NINE-TO-FIVE, THEY WANT YOUTH
WORKERS WHO CARE, WHO KNOW THE SYSTEM WELL, WHO
HAVE ABORIGINAL CONNECTIONS AND KNOWLEDGE, THEY
WANT TO STOP BEING HARASSED BY THE POLICE.”
ACTIVITIES FOR YOUNG
PEOPLE THAT ARE
OUTSIDE OF SCHOOL
HOURS TO KEEP THEM
FROM GETTING BORED
AND ENGAGING IN CRIME,
PROGRAMS LIKE OZTAG.”

PEOPLE SHOULD CARE AND BE
WILLING TO FIGHT FOR US TO
HAVE THINGS BETTER. THEY
SHOULD DO THINGS THEY
SAY THEY ARE GOING TO DO
AND HELP US TO NAVIGATE
SYSTEMS.”

WHAT I WANT TO SEE HAPPEN IS BETTER COPPERS, BETTER
YOUTH PROGRAMS FOR KIDS. THERE’S GOT TO BE A LOT
OF PROGRAMS. THERE’S NOTHING HERE TO DO, NOTHING
FOR THE KIDS. AFTER HOURS IS THE WORST. IF THERE WERE
PROGRAMS AFTER HOURS THERE WOULD BE A LOT MORE
TRUST AND THE KIDS WOULDN’T BE SO BORED ON THE
STREETS.”
ACLOS WORK 7AM
TILL 3PM - NOT WHEN
PEOPLE NEED THEM.”

MORE KOORI WORKERS - SO
THAT WE ARE NOT SHAMED TO
GO IN THERE.”

MOUNTY YARNS 37

1.3 More engaging programs, supports and
activities that young people want
Aboriginal young people want:
• More youth-led activities and programs, to increase
their skills, self-confidence and connection to
community and country
• To have more leadership roles and decision-making
power in the design and delivery of youth support and
programs
• More places with good facilities for young people to
hang out, that are well maintained, open after hours
and safe
• More cultural camps and opportunities to engage in
culture
• Funding for community-led early engagement and
support programs, particularly for 7 - 14 and 18 - 28
year olds

Some suggestions from the young people that they want to
do:
• Basketball
• More cultural programs
• Skatepark
• Native gardens
• Better parks
• BMX tracks
• Parks that don’t have
• Outdoor activities
needles in them
• Community events
• More swings
• Mentoring programs
• Youth Groups
• Support services

38 MOUNTY YARNS

...MORE ACTIVITIES FOR THE BOYS, AND PLACES TO HANG
OUT. TO HANG OUT WITH EACH OTHER, AND GET YOU KNOW
LIKE, JUST EVERYTHING. LIKE A POOL TABLE AND THAT. SO
WE CAN ALL JUST CHILL. KICK BACK WITH NO ALCOHOL.
YEAH, JUST MORE ACTIVITIES. GETTING INVOLVED WITH THE
BOYS SO WE ARE NOT OUT THERE DOING CRIMES.”

MORE THINGS TO KEEP US OCCUPIED. THERE’S NOTHING
FOR KIDS TO DO IN THIS AREA EXCEPT GO TO HOYTS
AND HANG AROUND THE SHOPS. MORE FREE ACTIVITIESESPECIALLY AT NIGHT WHEN WE ARE GETTING INTO
TROUBLE!”

WE WENT ON A CULTURAL CAMP AND THE BOYS CRIED
BECAUSE IT WAS THE ONLY CAMP THEY’D BEEN TO WHERE
THEY HADN’T BEEN SENT HOME.”

THE STUFF WITH JR [JUST REINVEST] IS AWESOME
BECAUSE YOU DON’T HAVE TO DO IT BUT YOU WANT TO DO
IT, IT’S SOMETHING REALLY POSITIVE.”

1.4 Out of Home Care (OOHC)
What Aboriginal young people want from the OOHC
system:
• Increase availability and improve culturally appropriate
support for families
• Better support for families before a child is removed
• Ensure all available options are exhausted before a
child is removed
• Department of Communities and Justice (DCJ) to work
with representatives of the Mount Druitt community
and Just Reinvest NSW to improve their processes
and procedures for young people leaving OOHC,
including:
• Establish clear processes to create and monitor leaving
care plans
• Knowing what your rights are and what you’re entitled
to when you’re in and leaving care
• Establish clear processes to support young people to
connect with their families and community

1.5 More housing options with real support
DCJ housing and services need to work more
collaboratively to ensure:
• That no young person is sleeping on the streets
• There is an increase in the availability of Housing
NSW stock and young people should be prioritised,
especially coming out of care and custody
• Young people have access to more supported
accommodation options including transitional
accommodation and affordable housing
• Wrap around support is available for young people in
housing to ensure that young people are not set up to
fail

A LOT MORE THEY COULDA DID SO HEAPS LIKE EVERYTHING
MORE BUT THEY DIDN’T REALLY CARE ABOUT THE CULTURE
AT ALL LIKE IF I EVER GOT CAUGHT TALKING ABOUT ANY BITS
OF MY CULTURE THEY’D LIKE MAKE SLURS AND STUFF ABOUT
IT. THEY DIDN’T REALLY LIKE TO HEAR IT, ANYTHING ABOUT
THAT STUFF EVEN WHEN I WENT TO SCHOOL AND STUFF AND
I CAME BACK ALL PROUD AND STUFF THEY DIDN’T REALLY
WANT TO HEAR IT. EVEN VISITATION FROM FAMILY, THAT WAS
CUT OFF COMPLETELY, IT WAS LIKE ONCE A MONTH FOR
ME BUT I GOT TO SEE MY MUM LIKE THREE TIMES, FOUR
TIMES A YEAR WHICH WAS LIKE SORRY IT WAS STUFFED. I
DUNNO THEY COULDA DONE HEAPS MORE LIKE EVEN WITH
PROGRAMS AND STUFF.”

I GOT ACCOMMODATION AND THEN WASN’T GIVEN ANY
SUPPORT. I DIDN’T HEAR FROM MY YOUTH WORKERS FOR A
MONTH. THINGS HAD ALREADY FALLEN APART BY THEN.”

IT WOULD OF BEEN GOOD TO HAVE STABLE
ACCOMMODATION- GROWING UP NEVER HAD MY OWN BED,
AND SUPPORT PEOPLE, THAT REALLY CARE.”

IT WOULD BE GREAT TO HAVE AN APARTMENT COMPLEX
WITH A YOUTH CENTRE THERE THAT HAD YOUTH WORKERS,
EMPLOYMENT AND OTHER GOOD SERVICES.”
MOUNTY YARNS 39

1.6 Mental health, alcohol and other drug (AOD)
support
Aboriginal young people want:
• More healing on country options and support
connecting to culture
• More Aboriginal workers who understand what the
young people are going through
• More cultural safety training for staff in mainstream
services around Aboriginal young people’s
experiences of mental health, AOD and best practice
• Mental health and AOD workers who can meet young
people where they feel comfortable and on their terms
• Funding for dual diagnosis services that can support
young people experiencing mental health and AOD
issues
• Funding for services to provide earlier and ongoing
support for young people experiencing mental health
and AOD issues
• Earlier diagnosis and treatment options for cognitive
disabilities
• Better training for schools, police and service
providers around mental health and AOD
• Develop culturally safe intake and assessment tools
• Young people should not have to continuously retell
their trauma to access basic supports or every time
they interact with a new worker/service
• More support and resourcing for young people to
learn how to support other young people
• Flexible funding for young men and women’s groups

40 MOUNTY YARNS

WHAT WE NEED IS A SERVICE IN MOUNT DRUITT THAT’S
MADE FOR YOUNG ABORIGINAL MEN AND WOMEN AND
UNDERSTANDS OUR HISTORY, CULTURE AND TRAUMA. TO
HELP US NOT GO INTO CUSTODY IN THE FIRST PLACE, BUT
IF WE DO, THAT WE CAN ACCESS EVEN IF WE’RE IN CUSTODY
TO KEEP THAT SUPPORT GOING WITH THE SAME SERVICE.”

WE HAVE TO COME INTO CONTACT WITH THE JUSTICE
SYSTEM TO GET ACCESS TO SUPPORT. EVEN THEN WE
DON’T GET ALL THE HELP WE NEED.”

LACK OF KNOWLEDGE AROUND CULTURE AND WHERE YOUNG
PEOPLE COME FROM LEADS TO MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES,
ISSUES WITH BELONGING AND SELF-WORTH.”

2. Justice
2.1 Policing

I WANT TO WALK AROUND MOUNTY WITHOUT BEING
WORRIED ABOUT BEING HARASSED.”

Aboriginal young people want to see change in:
Police practices:
• Stop the racial profiling of Aboriginal young people and
the misuse of police powers, especially in relation to the
“special powers” that police have:
» Strike Force Raptor should not police young
people, or at least not proactively
» Don’t allow Firearms Prohibition Orders (FPOs) to
be issued if the young person has never been in
possession of a firearm or charged with a firearms
related offence
» Stop using the Firearms Act search powers to target
young people
» Stop the overuse of move on directions
» Stop using Suspect Target Management Plans
(STMP) on young people, STMP III is not a solution
» Stop searching young people just because they are
known to police or have a criminal history
• Stop arresting young people for:
» Offensive language and behaviour
» Breach of bail
• Stop doing bail compliance checks if there is no court
ordered enforcement condition in place:
» Even if an enforcement order is in place, police
should be mindful of the impact these checks have
on family and other children in the house

ONE PERSON’S HARASSMENT IS ANOTHER PERSON’S
PROACTIVE POLICING.”

WE NEED MORE POLICE WHO CARE, THAT THE JOB ISN’T
A POWER TRIP, WHERE THEY ACTUALLY WANT TO FORM
RELATIONSHIPS AND LISTEN AND RESPOND TO WHAT
COMMUNITY WANTS. THEY NEED TO STOP ASSUMING WE
ARE ALL THE SAME AND THAT THEY KNOW US AND OUR
SITUATIONS. IF WE HAVE MORE COPPERS LIKE THAT, THAT
ARE NOT JUST THERE TO GET A PAYCHECK, AND ARE NOT
THERE TO JUST HARASS AND PICK ON YOUNG PEOPLE, OR
JUST COPPERS THAT DON’T, AS SOON AS THEY PUT THEIR
GUN ON OR THEIR BADGE ON, IT’S NOT A POWER TRIP
FOR THEM. IT’S ACTUALLY A COMMUNITY SERVICE JOB
FOR THEM. THEY COME AND THEY’RE SUPPOSED TO HELP
AND PROTECT THE COMMUNITY. BUT EVERY COMMUNITY
THEY GO IN THEY’RE NOT WANTED. EVERYONE HATES
THEM AND ALWAYS GOT BAD EXPERIENCES.”

POLICE INVESTIGATE POLICE, WE ALL KNOW THAT. WE NEED
SOMETHING MORE INDEPENDENT.”

MOUNTY YARNS 41

Better training for police:
• Western Sydney Watch Committee (WSWC) to provide
localised cultural safety training for police in Mount Druitt
Police Area Command
• More training around how and when to engage with
young people, learning from the experts - young people
and their trusted supports
• All police in the Mount Druitt Police Area Command to
watch the Mounty Yarns film and be provided with this
resource

BUT IT COULD HELP IF WE KNEW WHAT THEY THINK AND
WHAT THEY’RE COMING FROM WHEN THEY SEE US RUNNING,
AND THEY COULD UNDERSTAND WHAT WE THINK AND WHAT
WE SEE AND HOW WE FEEL WHEN THEY COME, HOW WE
FEEL WHEN OUR LIVES ARE IN DANGER, YOU KNOW WHAT I
MEAN?”

More community oversight of policing:
• There needs to be an earlier, independent police
complaint investigations process with oversight and action
led by community - stop letting police investigate police
• The Law Enforcement Conduct Commission (LECC) needs
to be more accountable to young people and community
- currently LECC does not have community trust as an
independent and responsive accountability mechanism
• Develop a streamlined process for formal police
complaints, including better communication between
community, police, lawyers and external accountability
mechanisms
• Police commit to meeting with the WSWC every two
months and as requested informally
• WSWC, JR Mount Druitt and other relevant community
organisations to have access to Mount Druitt police
station data

[POLICE NEED TO] LEARN TO WORK DIRECT WITH YOUNG
PEOPLE AND JUST THE WAY, YEAH JUST THE WAY THEY VIEW
US YOUNG BLACK PEOPLE... LIKE HOW THEY LIKE APPROACH
US. LIKE HOW THEY ACT WITH YOUNG KOORI PEOPLE.
BECAUSE YOU CAN TELL IT’S DIFFERENT TO HOW THEY ACT
WITH THE POLYNESIANS AND THE WHITES OR ANY OTHER
RACE. IT’S CLEAR AS DAY IN MOUNT DRUITT ANYWAY. IT’S
CLEAR AS. I GUESS YOU KNOW STOP BEING A DICKHEAD AND
JUST GROW UP. LIKE RACISM IS TAUGHT, IT’S NOT LEARNED.
YOU CAN’T BE BORN RACIST. SO OBVIOUSLY THEY WERE
TAUGHT DIFFERENT WAYS TO HOW WE WERE TAUGHT.
HOPEFULLY THEY CAN CHANGE THE WAYS THEY INTERACT
WITH US.”

Earlier support for young people:
• Funding for community members to support young
people in police cells and for follow up support after
being in custody:
» Young people have earlier access to and more
options for support that aren’t associated with a
PCYC

IT NEEDS TO START AT THE ACADEMY INSTEAD OF TRAINING
THEM TO BE CHARGE FOCUSSED. TRAINING THEM ON HOW
TO WORK WITH PEOPLE, IN PARTICULAR ABORIGINAL PEOPLE
AND YOUNG PEOPLE.”

42 MOUNTY YARNS

2.2 Stop issuing fines
Aboriginal young people want:
• Free public transport for all young people
• No fines to children under the age of 18
• Free opal cards for young people and adults (U26)
who have interactions with youth justice or child
protection systems
• More use of discretion to not fine young people
• Have Youth Justice case workers travel to Mount Druitt
for reporting, instead of making young people travel
to Penrith or Blacktown and risk a fare evasion fine
• Transit officers and transport police should be trained
on:
» How and when to engage with young people
» The impact they have on young Aboriginal
people because of their experiences of over
policing and excessive use of force

THE YOUTH JUSTICE OFFICE IS IN PENRITH. IF YOU HAVE
NO TRAIN FARE, YOU WILL GET BREACHED. YOU WILL GET
A FINE TO GO TO PENRITH SO THAT YOU CAN CHECK IN
FOR YOUTH JUSTICE AND THEN A FINE WHEN YOU GO
HOME. THERE ARE PLENTY OF BUILDINGS IN MOUNT DRUITT
THAT COULD HOST IT, BUT YOU EITHER HAVE TO GO TO
BLACKTOWN OR PENRITH.” - WORKER

SIMPLE ANSWER IS, DON’T BE ARSEHOLES... YOU KNOW,
APPROACH US HOW THEY EXPECT TO BE TREATED, YOU
KNOW? HAVE AN OPEN MIND, YOU KNOW? NOT ALL OF US
ARE CRIMINALS, JUST BECAUSE WE ALL HANG OUT... THE
FINES, I KNOW IT’S ONLY A LITTLE THING, BUT THEY DO
TEND TO PISS US OFF A LOT. IF THEY CAN DO ANYTHING TO
MAKE IT BETTER, YEAH, I SUPPOSE IT’S THAT.”

MOUNTY YARNS 43

2.3 Courts
What Aboriginal young people want from the court system:
• More opportunities for young Aboriginal people to be
part of the Youth Koori Court
• More realistic bail conditions that don’t set young
people up to fail
• Optional community-based support is offered to
young people, regardless if they have been found
guilty or pleaded guilty

[WHAT’S YOUR EXPERIENCES IN COURT]: THEY’RE ALRIGHT.
KOORI COURT DEFINITELY MADE IT EASIER... THEY ACTUALLY
GIVE YOU A CHANCE.”
[WHAT WAS IT ABOUT KOORI COURT THAT WORKED WELL]:
THEY LISTEN MORE, THEY LISTEN TO US, WHAT WE HAVE TO
SAY AND HOW WE FEEL.”
[ANYTHING ELSE YOU WANT TO SAY ABOUT COURT]: JUST,
DON’T TAKE KOORI COURT OUT. KOORI COURT IS REALLY
HELPFUL, YEAH. KEEP IT THERE FOR OUR YOUNGER PEOPLE
WHO ARE GROWING UP AND GOING THROUGH THE SYSTEM.”

[WHAT WOULD MAKE NORMAL COURT BETTER]: JUST LISTEN
MORE TO US, NOT TO THE COPPERS AND PROSECUTORS.
BECAUSE THEY ARE TALKING SHIT ALL THE TIME.”

THEY GIVE YOU REALLY STRICT BAIL CONDITIONS THAT YOU
CAN’T FOLLOW. I ONCE HAD BAIL CONDITIONS TO REPORT
TO MT DRUITT POLICE BUT WAS LIVING IN PARRAMATTA.”
I’VE NEVER GOTTEN BAIL AT THE POLICE STATION.… BUT THEN
I GET BAIL FROM THE COURTROOM, THE JUDGE ALWAYS SAYS
I SHOULD OF GOTTEN BAIL.”
44 MOUNTY YARNS

2.4 Custody
Aboriginal young people want to see change in:
Complaints in custody:
• Establish an independent committee led by Aboriginal
young people who have been affected by the criminal
justice system to advocate around:
» Individual complaints in custody
» Systemic issues
• Have independent community members monitoring
youth justice systems, including being granted access
to check on young people - not to expect young
people to speak up, especially if they are in a custodial
setting
Behaviour control in custody:
• Stop using segregation powers for behaviour
management
• Detainee Risk Management Plans need better
safeguards:
» Young people should have a mandatory
minimum of six hours out of their cell every day
» Young people should not be forced to eat alone
in their cell with their hands
» Youth Justice to investigate safe cutlery
alternatives and review meal options to make
sure they are nutritious

BETTER TO HAVE MOB COMING AND TALK TO BOYS WHO
THEY TRUST. WE DO NEED A ROLE OF AN INDEPENDENT
RESPECTED COMMUNITY PERSON – WHO’S NOT TIED TO
GOVERNMENT. EVEN THE OMBUDSMAN IS SEEN AS PART OF
THE GOVERNMENT.”
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
WITH A DISABILITY, NEED
TO HAVE SOMEONE
REACHING OUT RATHER
THAN EXPECT THEM TO
REPORT COMPLAINTS.”

IT’D BE GOOD TO HAVE AN
OV* FROM EACH CULTURE
- AN ABORIGINAL ONE, AN
ISLANDER ONE, A LEBANESE
ONE, IT WOULD BE BETTER.”

CRIMINAL RECORDS ARE A BARRIER. IT’S HARD TO FIGHT
THAT BARRIER. IT SHOULD BE ABOUT THE BEST FIT FOR THE
JOB – AND THAT INCLUDES CULTURE. IF WE THINK ABOUT
OVERREPRESENTATION OF ABORIGINAL PEOPLE YOU NEED
MENTORS WITH LIVED EXPERIENCES TO CUT THROUGH
THAT. MOB DON’T BELIEVE THAT THEY CAN GET OVER THAT
BARRIER.”
IF THERE IS
CONSISTENT
BLACKFULLAS
COMING IN AND OUT
EVERY WEEK - KIDS
ATTITUDES CHANGE”

I THINK THE BOYS WOULD
TRUST ME HAVING COME OUT
RECENTLY AND KNOWING
WHERE THEY COME FROM. TO
TELL ME WHAT’S GOING ON
FOR THEM.”
MOUNTY YARNS 45

Connection to Aboriginal workers, culture and
community while in custody:
• More cultural programs and access to Elders
• More Aboriginal case workers
• Advocate for more young people with lived
experience of the criminal justice system to be
mentors for other young people in custody:
» Children’s Guardian and Youth Justice to trial
different processes around risk assessments and
fast tracking Working with Children’s Checks
(WWCC)
• More Aboriginal community members supported to
have access and provide ongoing engagement to
young people both in custody and when they leave
Health and mental health:
• Better and culturally safe screening of young people
on entry to custody for health and disability related
needs
• Have more options for therapeutic responses for
young Aboriginal people in custody other than
cognitive behavioural therapy
• Young people shouldn’t be punished if they aren’t
ready to see a psychologist - a custodial setting is not
always the best or safest place to talk about trauma

46 MOUNTY YARNS

NO ONE IS EVER GOING TO TALK TO A WORKER ABOUT
THEIR PROBLEMS... AN ABORIGINAL PERSON, A MENTOR OR
SOMETHING YEAH. IF WE HAVE ONE OF THEM IN THERE,
100% THE BOYS WILL TRUST THAT WORKER, 100%. SOME
OF THE BOYS WILL TRUST SOMEONE WHO WILL JUST GIVE
THEM A BIT OF TIME, BUT THEY WILL NEVER TRUST THAT
THE OFFICERS ARE LOOKING AFTER THEM. EVER... SO I
GUARANTEE THAT SOMEONE THAT’S BEEN THROUGH IT, AND
HAS LIKE, BEEN IN THERE, A SIMILAR SITUATION, AND HAS
COME OUT, AND IS DOING BETTER THAN WHAT HE IS, WILL BE
A BIG HELP, LIKE YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN.”

ABORIGINAL WORKERS... LIKE I’VE ONLY MET A HANDFUL
OF ABORIGINAL WORKERS, YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN. LIKE
THE ONLY ABORIGINAL PERSON I’VE SEEN IN A POSITION
OF POWER IN A YOUTH JUSTICE CENTRE WAS AT FRANK
BAXTER AND HE WAS LIKE THE CENTRE HEAD, BUT OTHER
THAN THAT YEAH LIKE I SAID. IF WE KNOW THEY’RE KOORI,
WE’LL RESPECT THEM. IT’S NOT JUST BECAUSE THEY ARE
BLACK, WE AUTOMATICALLY RESPECT THEM BECAUSE NO
DOUBT THEY’LL HAVE SIMILAR SITUATIONS TO OURS AND IT
MAKES IT EASIER TO RELATE TO US MORE THAN THEY CAN,
YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN. THAT’S WHY I THINK IT WOULD BE
BETTER TO HAVE SOMEONE IN THERE WHO IS NOT A PART
OF A UNIT OR A PART OF THE DEPARTMENT. EVEN IF THEY
ARE PART OF THE DEPARTMENT IT WILL BE BETTER THAN IT
WAS. LIKE, THAT WILL GO A LONG WAY.”

2.5 Throughcare - pre and post release support
Aboriginal young people want:
• An Aboriginal controlled, community-based pre and
post release support in Mount Druitt
• More engagement from community and services to
meet with young people in custody prior to their
release
• Better access to cultural activities outside of custody,
no young person should have to go into custody to
access cultural support
• Better transition planning for young people leaving
custody, such as having photo ID
• Better coordination of NDIS plans for young people
leaving custody

ALL KIDS WANT CULTURAL PROGRAMS AND ABORIGINAL
WORKERS INSIDE – BUT WE WANT IT ON THE OUTSIDE
TOO.”

THERE’S NO THROUGHCARE IN MOUNT DRUITT. IT WOULD
OF BEEN GOOD HAVING SUPPORT GETTING, A JOB, CAR,
LICENCE, HOUSING, THINGS THAT MAKE YOU FEEL BETTER
AND YOU’RE ACHIEVING GOALS IN YOUR LIFE.”

MOUNTY YARNS 47

3. Education and Learning
Aboriginal young people want:
More culture in education:
• Provide more opportunities for Aboriginal students to
engage with Elders and cultural learning at school
• Schools to create more opportunities for Aboriginal
family members and community members to participate
in school activities
• Engage community members and young people in
decision-making around how to better engage young
Aboriginal people in education
Suspension as a last resort:
• Shorten suspension periods or develop alternative
approaches to suspensions
• Provide more options for in-school suspensions
Better cultural training for teachers and staff:
• Increase cultural safety training for staff on Aboriginal
culture, history and the continuing impact of colonisation
• Improve training for staff to be able to respond to
behaviours in a trauma-informed, strengths-based and
culturally appropriate way
• Ensure that trusted school staff such as Aboriginal
Engagement Officers and visiting Elders, have more
influence over responses and support for Aboriginal
students, as well as influence over responses to racism
and sharing of culture within schools

48 MOUNTY YARNS

HAVING ELDERS AND LIKE HAVING PROGRAMS AND STUFF,
DURING SCHOOL HOURS. LEARNING ABOUT CULTURE IS
WHAT I WAS INTO. THAT’S WHAT MADE ME WANT TO GO
TO SCHOOL, DOING PROGRAMS.”
MORE CULTURAL
MENTORS IN SCHOOL.”

TEACHERS NEED BETTER
TRAINING TO DEAL WITH
CHALLENGING BEHAVIOURS.”

WE NEED TO HELP TEACHERS TO UNDERSTAND WHERE
YOUNG PEOPLE ARE COMING FROM AND TO SPEND THE
TIME TO DO THAT. TEACHERS NEED TO BE MORE OPEN
MINDED OF PEOPLE’S UPBRINGING AND BACKGROUND.”
WE NEED MORE
ABORIGINAL TEACHERS
AND ELDERS - WHO HAVE
A BETTER UNDERSTANDING
OF OUR BACKGROUND.”

THEY NEED TO BE
MORE LENIENT TOWARD
SUSPENSIONS - GIVE THE
KIDS A CHANCE- SUSPENSIONS
SHOULD BE A LAST OPTION.”

SCHOOLS SHOULD DO MORE IN-SCHOOL SUSPENSIONS SUSPENSIONS AREN’T A PUNISHMENT - YOU GET TO HANG
OUT WITH YOUR FRIENDS THAT’S WHEN YOU GET INTO
TROUBLE.”
THEY NEED TO BE MORE LENIENT TOWARD SUSPENSIONS GIVE THE KIDS A CHANCE- SUSPENSIONS SHOULD BE A LAST
OPTION.”

Improved support for Aboriginal students in education:
• Better holistic support to keep them engaged and
wanting to learn:
» More activities and interests that young people
want to do
» More support in class, both learning and emotional
» More after class support to be available
» Financial support and how to access it
• Better diagnosis options and follow up support for young
people with a disability - Mount Druitt is in the city, there
should not be as many issues with access and follow up
as there are
Alternative schools:
• Increase access to alternative schools that still have a
focus on numeracy and literacy
More work experience options and learning pathways for
Aboriginal students:
• Provide more work experience programs and
employment pathway opportunities within school
• Have better pathways for young people who want to
leave school, not be forced to stay when they are not
engaged
• More opportunities to learn about starting up small
businesses

THE MONEY IS GOING TO THE WRONG PLACES – IT IS GOING
INTO TEACHERS WHEN IT’S THE AUNTIES THAT ARE THE ONES
THAT KIDS LISTEN TO AND RESPECT.”
SCHOOLS SHOWING THEY
VALUE AND RESPECT
ABORIGINAL CULTURES
AND HISTORY.”

THAT’S WHY SOME KIDS
JUST LEAVE - BECAUSE
THEY STRESS OUT AND
NEED HELP.”

BETTER CULTURAL
AWARENESS TRAINING FOR
STAFF - MORE RESPECT FOR
ABORIGINAL CULTURE AND
AN UNDERSTANDING OF OUR
HISTORY”

MORE LEARNING OF
ABORIGINAL HISTORY
AND CULTURE - AND NOT
JUST ABOUT CAPTAIN
COOK - SEE IT THROUGH
OUR EYES”

SCHOOLS NEED TO APPLY MORE INCENTIVES THAT THE KIDS
ACTUALLY WANT - THOSE SCHOOL ACTIVITIES SHOULDN’T
COST MONEY – LOTS OF KIDS CAN’T AFFORD IT. THEY ARE
SOMETIMES THE THINGS THAT KEEP KIDS AT SCHOOL, LIKE
FOOTY AND GALA DAYS AND CULTURAL ACTIVITIES.”
HAVE SUPPORT FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO
ARE GOING THROUGH A
TOUGH TIME. NOT JUST AT
SCHOOL – BUT HAVE THAT
SUPPORT AFTER HOURS.”

IT WOULD BE BETTER IF WE
COULD HAVE MORE TEACHER
AIDS - SOMETIMES THERE IS
ONLY 1 IN A CLASS AND THEY
HAVE THEIR HANDS FULL WITH
ONE YOUNG PERSON.”
MOUNTY YARNS 49

What you can do right now
• Back our young people to advocate for change in Mount Druitt:
» Donate to support our advocacy strategy
» Share your skills, knowledge or networks
» Volunteer
» Share this Mounty Yarns document and the Official Film: Mounty Yarns https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bni2BDutOgo&t=736s
• Help to establish an Aboriginal controlled youth service:
» We are asking government, corporates, and philanthropy to collaborate to resource our youth
service
» If you’re interested in joining our working group to make this happen - contact mtdruittinfo@
justreinvest.org.au
What government and services can do:
• Work in partnership with Aboriginal young people from Mount Druitt to respond to the ideas and
pathways for change young people have identified
• Share data on what services, programs, projects are currently funded in Mount Druitt and what they
are funded to deliver (investment mapping) and hold services accountable for delivering what young
people need:
» Government and NGOs to provide data on what is being funded and for what
» Provide data to track and understand what is working, and what isn’t working, and to track progress
» Police, Education, Health, Housing and other government services to improve their relationships
with community and work with community to achieve better outcomes

50 MOUNTY YARNS

THANKS TO
The biggest thanks goes to all the young people who have been involved in Mounty Yarns. We
value and appreciate your knowledge, guidance and strength to advocate for your community
and the next generation coming through. This initiative wouldn’t have been possible without the
trust you shared with each other and that you extended to the Mounty Yarns team.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

The Mental Health Commission
The Koorie Youth Council
Dusseldorp Forum
VivCourt Trading
The Paul Ramsay Foundation
Kowa
Youth Koori Court
The Native Son’s OzTag team
Kimberwalli
Jesuit Social Services

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Julie Williams
Nicole Mekler
Lucy Tierney
Jess Brown
Blake Tatafu
Dolie Ufi
James Clifford
Daniel Daylight
Mark Riboldi

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Peter Cohen
Jenny Lovric
Sarah Hopkins
Joanna Lunzer
Karlie Stewart
Aboriginal Legal Service NSW/ACT
PIAC
Just Reinvest NSW and its
volunteers and interns

MOUNTY YARNS 51

www.justreinvest.org.au/mountyyarns

